1 Corinthians 6, 19 through 20.
Do you not know that your bodies are temples of the Holy Spirit who is in you, whom you have received from God?
You are not your own.
You were bought at a price.
Therefore honor God with your bodies.
This is the word of the Lord.
Amos, my three-year-old, spent a lot of his conscious life today watching me go through chemotherapy, which included losing every hair on my head and on my face.
And so he will regularly say to me, dad, I miss your small beard.
Can you bring back your small beard?
So at the beginning of this past summer in my bathroom one evening, Amos strolled in and I decided to delight him by
shaving my face.
That was the inciting incident to a full blown traumatic episode.
Kirsten came into the bathroom 20 seconds later with all three of my children watching me screaming in terror.
I hate seeing myself like this.
I just completely lost it.
drowning in an ocean of unprocessed trauma from chemotherapy that ended almost a year prior.
And in that moment, that was of course just the tip of the iceberg.
Over the course of the months that followed, I began to uncover the truth that I had built a whole new set of habits around controlling my body, how it felt, and what was happening to it.
The previous year of my life had been a profound
loss of control.
I couldn't eat and I struggled to go to the bathroom.
I wasn't healthy or strong enough to coach my son's little league team or even attend the games sometimes.
Often I couldn't preach or show up at the office.
I couldn't jog the loop that I had run for years.
I couldn't even walk it on bad days.
I couldn't stay awake long enough to watch a show with my wife, but I couldn't sleep well enough to get out of bed in the morning.
I lost all sense of control over my body.
health, activity, attractiveness, all of it.
And so I had found a new set of habits and behaviors that worked for me.
Activity, diet, supplements, an equation that added up to the illusion of control that I had lost.
And there's a word for that.
A word for the constant preoccupation with controlling my body.
Vanity.
In the wake of that traumatic episode, a question occurred to me, what if the greater redemption for me isn't controlling my body, but learning to submit to its limitations, restrictions, and imperfections as one of the primary mediums through which God is renewing my eternal soul?
The moment you realize your body or your image has become something you're managing rather than something
you're receiving is the moment that you know something is out of whack.
At least that was my initial cue or signal.
The truth is I didn't notice it at first not in an obvious way.
It would start with low grade anxiety on Saturday nights.
I'd find myself struggling to fall asleep, restless until I could piece together an outfit in my mind that would allow me to feel beautiful or comfortable and free.
free in whatever way I felt about my body that week.
The anxiety would rise as I reasoned through different options, fully aware because it always happened that the next morning when I stood on a church stage before a few thousand people or saw a photo of myself from the gatherings, all the internal narratives would find their way into my mind, slowly eroding whatever confidence I had had in my appearance.
It's hard to express the subtle vulnerability of standing on a stage every week.
especially as a woman.
And it might sound small, but over time and really over the past year, I've begun to realize how much mental and emotional real estate this has been taking up in my life.
How most of my Sunday mornings have been more preoccupied with anxiety and fear rather than faith for what God could do among us.
And that's when I noticed the shift somewhere along the way.
My imagination had moved away from God's presence towards my own performance.
My attention wasn't first on what God might give, but on what I might lose.
Not on surrender, but on self-protection.
What I wanted, and what I have wanted, is control.
Control over how you see me, over whether you think I'm beautiful enough or not, and over the story my image might tell you week to week.
And while I know that the impulse is deeply human to feel that way,
I also realized that this nagging anxiety was more than just insecurity.
It is vanity, but not the loud kind.
The kind that reveals what one actually believed about themselves and about the God who made them.
So we're continuing our teaching series this morning on the seven deadly sins that up for today is the widespread, socially celebrated and deadly sin of vanity, which is not actually
among the seven sins codified in church history that have framed this teaching series.
So how'd Vanity sneak into this party?
I'm so glad you asked.
Well, because lust is among the seven deadly sins and, spoiler alert, we plan to spend the whole of Lent this year focused on the body and its place in the spiritual life.
Lust for the body of another is frequently taught on and worn against in the church, but personally, though I've attended church since I was in my mother's womb, I've never once heard a sermon on the equally dangerous lust for the perfection of my own body or image called vanity.
So it's that variety of lust that we'll be zeroing in on this morning and
Well, sure, I can be vain about my career successes, my children's behavior, my spouse's salary, my home decor, and a number of other things.
When we use the word vanity this morning, we mean it specifically how it's primarily used in relation to my physical appearance.
So first, we have to acknowledge that as a society, we have a vanity problem.
In 2023, Americans spent $128 billion on beauty products and procedures, which is nearly 10 times the estimated cost to eradicate global human slavery.
If every American spent 10% less on their appearance, we could buy the freedom of every enslaved person.
Let that sink in.
It's also a significantly higher figure than the very highest projections for eradicating global hunger.
We could feed the world and then have a good chunk left over with what we're spending on our figures and complexions.
In fact, Americans spend roughly the same amount annually on dieting that experts estimate would cost you end world hunger.
We are spending enough trying to still our appetites to satisfy every appetite.
The World Health Organization estimates it would take somewhere between $41 and $58 to provide medical care annually for all people, and Americans spent an average of $897 per person on the beauty industry last year.
So 5% less on beauty per person, and the whole world gets access to a doctor.
Americans spent an average of $2,000 per person on clothing in the last year.
And the data suggests that there are enough clothes that exist already in the world today to clothe every needy person.
So there's plenty to go around.
The issue is not one of production, but one of redistribution.
New jackets are being stuffed into closets that are full of perfectly fine jackets.
We are upgrading in style, not meeting needs.
We do not shop out of necessity, but for pleasure.
A cute sweater for this fall, some new raw denim
for this winter, a tasteful scarf for my upcoming work trip to France.
Now hear me on this.
I am not trying to shame you.
I buy hair product, face wash, and face lotion.
I've got a weakness for a sweet vintage find, and I'd love to get a new sweater and join you on that work trip to France.
There is nothing inherently wrong with looking good,
feeling good or eating good.
But when does a good thing become ultimate?
When does a neutral appetite become an idol?
When we worship it, when we give it our adoration, affection, and identity.
And socially speaking, vanity is an idol.
In the West, physical appearance is celebrated, honored, and pursued more than anything that's going on beneath the skin.
And I hate to say it.
I mean, I actually hate to say it, but physical desirability is the most valuable social currency today.
And if I can, and I think that I can with humility, I have to say that the truth is the women in this room likely feel that 10 times more than most men ever will.
The equality between men and women has come a long way in our country, but how good you look in the office is still one of the most valuable assets on your resume if you're a woman.
Man or woman, there is an unspoken equation we all seem to learn somewhere along the way.
The more attractive we appear, the more attention we get, the more influence we have, the more doors that will be opened, socially, professionally, relationally.
And the truth is over time we don't just measure each other by it, we measure ourselves by it too.
Our society has a vanity problem and wouldn't it be naive?
to assume that I've been breathing that toxic air this whole time but haven't contracted the disease.
Do I have a vanity problem?
Well, is your physical appearance for you personally a source of adoration, affection, or identity?
Do you find yourself fixing your hair or makeup every time you go to the bathroom or glimpsing at your reflection each time you pass a window?
Are you preoccupied by your weight, by losing it, maintaining it, or controlling it?
Does it eat up space in your mental energy?
Do you spend more time on your body than on your soul, more time at the gym, for instance, than you do in prayer?
Do you spend more time, money, or mental energy on your physical appearance that you keep secret or keep hidden from others, maybe a secret
eating habit of vending and purging or avoiding or indulging, maybe a secret supplement or medication that you don't want anyone to know you're taking or a secret product or treatment or procedure.
Here's the thing, sin always makes us want to hide.
So do you, in relation to your physical appearance, have anything at all that you're hiding?
If you, over the next year, if you've gained five to 10 pounds,
If you added some wrinkles to your complexion or grates to your hair with that, an honest self-reflection rock you at a level of your identity.
Would it alter how you feel about yourself or even how you see yourself?
I'm just asking for a friend.
So socially we have a vanity problem and it has almost certainly gotten into us more than we care to admit.
So where did that come from?
Well, the Bible's first couple of pages go out of the way to try to answer that very question.
The creation narrative in Genesis concludes, Adam and his wife were both naked and they felt no shame.
That's the final verse before we meet the serpent.
It is the crowning explanation of God's blessing.
A life sheltered in God's love is depicted as a shameless, peaceful relationship to my own body.
Isn't that interesting?
Have you ever noticed that?
Have you ever really thought about it?
Genesis 3.7, then the eyes of both of them were opened and they realized they were naked, so they sewed fig leaves together and made coverings for themselves.
This is the final male in the coffin of the biblical conflict is the last description of life, not sheltered in the love of God, but exposed by Satan's lie.
So check this out.
Sin, the one word summary for life outside of Eden is described first
not spiritually, psychologically, or emotionally, but bodily.
I once heard it said that everything wrong with the world can be summed up in the fact that everyone, absolutely everyone when looking at a group photo finds themselves first.
Genesis seems to push it a step further than that.
That absolutely everyone when looking in the mirror finds their flaws first.
Sin is the Bible's one word summary for the lie that's infected all of creation and sin is a human condition with bodily consequences.
Because of sin, we can't see our own bodies through God's eyes anymore.
Because of sin, my body is a source of shame to cover and hide or a project to work on and shape and perfect or an idol that I identify with to the neglect of my soul.
And because of sin, my naked and unashamed body becomes something that I want to cover up.
Sin means a broken relationship with the God who loves me, a broken relationship with others around me, a broken relationship with the very ground that I stand on.
But before any of that,
Sin is brokenness of the most personal variety.
It is a broken relationship with myself, with what I see when I look at myself and what I want you to see when you look at me.
And that means at least this much, that vanity charades as narcissism.
But the truth is vanity is driven by shame.
Vanity is characterized as an egotistical over-prioritization of my own image.
And as Carly Simon famously belted, you're so vain.
You're so vain.
Wow.
You probably think this song is about you.
Take it, Bethany.
Don't you, don't you, don't you.
We should do karaoke together sometime.
Yeah.
Vanity is most famously portrayed through the Greek myth of narcissus.
That's where we get the term narcissism.
And Vanity is the wicked queen and Snow White in the Seven Dwarves who obsesses over being the fairest of them all.
Vanity is Dorian Gray, Oscar Wilde's famous character who was obsessed with maintaining his youth.
And Vanity is Regina George, ruling a high school, or Derek Zulander threatened by Hansel.
Vanity is portrayed as always thinking too much of myself, but of course Vanity's real condition is the opposite.
Vanity is a preoccupation with one part of me because the truth is I think too little of myself.
And we have a word for that.
For a bodily appetite that I over-prioritize in an effort to cure my own shame.
We have a word for that.
Addiction.
Octavia Bright in her poignant memoir on recovery from alcohol addiction explains, there's a common misunderstanding that addiction is about pleasure, that addicts are greedy, undisciplined people who don't have any willpower and want every desire indulged without question like children.
But the truth is that once it sets in, addiction is not about feeling good, it's about not feeling terrible.
The pleasure found in the hit of one substance of choice be that whiskey, nicotine, cocaine, heroin, or sugar is not so much about what it adds, but what it takes away.
An immediate curb of anxiety, depression, fear, exhaustion, regret, boredom.
It keeps one's own feelings at bay the great repression.
For some, processes work just as well.
Sex, shopping, gambling, food, lack of food, work, exercise, and watching endless hours of television.
Behaviors can bring their own highs, but the purpose of the high is not necessarily pleasure in the experience, it's everything the high blots out.
And when the high wears off, the addict is left depleted in deficit rather than nourished by pleasure and hot on the high's heels, shame.
The British psychoanalyst Donald Winnicott gave language to this when he talked about what he called the false self.
The false self is the version of us that we construct to stay safe, to secure approval or avoid rejection.
And it's not fake in the sense of dishonesty, it's adaptive.
It learns what's rewarded, what's admired, what's keeping me from being abandoned.
And the false self often looks confident, composed, impressive, but internally it's exhausting because it has to keep performing.
This is where vanity so often lives.
Vanity becomes a strategy of the false self.
If I look right, I'll stay safe.
If I'm admired, I won't be rejected.
If I can manage how I'm seen, I can control how I'm loved.
And for many of us, I think it's important and fair to say that this didn't start as vanity.
It started as survival.
At some point, our bodies learned that appearance or performance or image could somehow protect us from shame.
Here's the problem.
The false self can win approval, but it cannot receive love because love requires presence, not performance.
But this isn't only personal.
Vanity is a false story rooted in a relational lie.
Social psychologist Leon Fitzsinger named this social comparison theory, and his insight was simple and also a bit unsettling.
Human beings don't determine their worth in isolation.
We determine it relationally.
In other words, we measure ourselves not by looking inward, but by looking sideways.
And comparison doesn't grow equally everywhere.
It intensifies in two kinds of environments, scarcity and visibility.
So scarcity, where love or affirmation or belonging actually feels limited or visibility where we feel seen, evaluated or even ranked.
That's why comparison shows up so strongly in families and workplaces and romantic relationships and on the bachelor.
And unfortunately, it begins early.
Studies suggest that body comparison and self-evaluation around appearance intensify in late childhood and early adolescence.
We know this.
Long before, though, we have language for what's happening.
And that matters because that means that comparison is being shaped long before we actually have the capacity to name and resist it, which means the environments that surround us, they don't introduce us to comparison.
They often amplify it.
Our modern world acts as a constant amplifier.
I think we could all agree on that.
Social media doesn't create comparison, but it simply industrializes it and even monetizes it.
And here's the lie comparison tells.
If I can locate myself higher, or at least not lower, I'll be okay.
But comparison doesn't clarify identity, it actually distorts it.
It turns the body into some kind of scoreboard and vanity into a constant audit of where we stand.
And that's why vanity isn't rooted in what's objectively true about us, but in a relational story, we're telling ourselves about who we are and where we belong.
And finally, vanity is actually not about perfecting the outer appearance.
It's about ordering inner chaos.
Yeah, another way to say this is when my inner world feels unstable, I try to stabilize the outer one.
So when life feels uncertain or stressful or out of my control, many of us reach for what can be controlled.
And for some, and the truth is most, that control takes form of managing our appearance.
And this is what I was sharing about earlier from my own life.
We watch ourselves in mirrors, we adjust our outfits, we tweak our hair, and we craft a certain image, not because we're shallow, but because it brings a sense of relief and order and control.
Research shows that body surveillance, which is that habit of monitoring how we look at spikes during stress or social threat,
for uncertainty, think middle school.
In other words, as crazy as this sounds, the mirror has become a tool for emotional regulation, a way to claim our nervous system, even if only temporarily.
If my appearance feels managed, maybe my life feels manageable.
But again, this kind of relief, as we all know, is fleeting.
Controlling the outer worlds can never fully stabilize the inner one, and vanity then becomes a coping mechanism.
A way to soothe anxiety and reorder inner chaos, but we know it can't heal the deeper unrest inside.
So we've got broken relationships with our own bodies.
Where did that come from?
Well, God created a world sheltered in His love in which we were naked and unashamed, a world that was ripped to part by the life of a serpent.
Resulting in reaching for the very love that we were already swimming in and the very first thing that we noticed after we did that Was our bodies I am not enough and the way that I look is not enough But I can do something about that Adam and Eve reach for fig leaves and you and I reach for diet plans and juice cleanses hair products and eyeliner Botox and self-tanner
Cosmetic procedures and GLP ones a new outfit or a clean pair of sneakers a number on the scale or a look in his eyes None of which are wrong in and of themselves if you found yourself anywhere on that list I know I did you are not vain Not necessarily When does anything on that list become wrong when I worship it?
when I use it for affection, attention, acceptance, or identity, when I define my body as good by any definition other than the blessing of my maker.
So then the question comes down to what makes our bodies good?
In her book, The Cost of Controls, Sharon Hottie Miller compares the cultural and difficult definitions of what makes our bodies good.
Now you'll see that here.
The world's definitions are youthful, thin in shape, beautiful or attractive, not sick, not limited by disability, always feeling good.
And God's definition, on the other hand, is good because you and I are made by Him.
You and I reflect His image.
You and I are bodies that are His actual temple, His chosen dwelling place and the place that He calls home.
So the question is,
Who's defining your relationship to your own body?
Is it the culture you were born into or the God who made you?
The truth about the serpent's lie is twofold.
First, when we try to control our bodies, they end up controlling us.
Your body and your sanity for that matter will be controlled by whatever medium you employ to try to control your body, be it diet, exercise, cosmetic work, skin treatments, or supplements.
And second, when we try to make our bodies good, they become the megaphone through which the enemy calls us bad.
They become a source of shame for most and an inflated ego for a few, both of which are a diminishment to the dignity endowed me by my maker.
At the root of all of this is a truth we rarely name out loud.
Vanity is not just about appearance, it's about salvation.
It's a false redemption, a fable of renewal offered in the place, in place of the true story that Jesus offers.
Vanity, it promises us what only resurrection can give.
Control over aging, escape from insignificance, and some form of immunity for mortality.
But the gospel tells a fundamentally different story.
Resurrection is not something we achieve or maintain, it is something that God does.
We don't preserve ourselves.
We are raised.
We don't manage our way into glory.
We receive it as a gift.
Vanity, if you're looking for a definition, is assuming responsibility for securing and maintaining an image that God alone can bestow.
For to us a child is born, to us a son is given.
The life of Jesus, the birth of God and a human body right in the middle of the biblical story is a profound, divinely compassionate response to the body's shame at the story's beginning.
God chose a body calling it good, restoring our relationships to our own bodies.
Hebrews chapter four, for we do not have a high priest who is unable to empathize with our weaknesses, but we have one who's been tempted in every way just as we are, yet he did not sin.
Let us then approach God's throne of grace with confidence so that we may receive mercy and find grace to help us in our time of need.
Jesus, because he left heaven, stripped himself of divine glory and wandered beyond the shelter of the Father's love into this contested world of lies and deceptions, because Jesus took on a body he is able to empathize with the human experience of life in a body.
Jesus had the
full range of experiences of life in a human body.
He got sick, had to pee, needed rest, and occasionally sneezed.
And he certainly had a couple of bad haircuts, got bloated and regretted getting seconds a time or two, and didn't love every last thing about his physical appearance.
God in Jesus submitted to the human experience in all of its weakness and fragility and that includes the need to fend off insecurity, self-centeredness and the endless spiral of self-perfection and pursuit of true lasting joy in the gaze of the father in relationship with the redeemed.
Yet he did not sin.
Jesus empathizes with you and I in every way, and he redeems you and I in every way because he fought in one hour battle, including, or maybe even especially, my battle with my own body.
My need to control, perfect, cover, or hide my body.
My need to be attractive, desired, stylish, or glamorous.
My need to be wanted or wantable by some definition of good I got from a source not named Yahweh.
Jesus is an empathetic,
Victor, and that means Hebrews chapter five, he is able to deal gently with those who are ignorant and who are going astray since he himself is subject to weakness.
So how does Jesus deal with vanity?
Somebody say it, how does Jesus deal with vanity?
Gently.
How does Jesus deal with vanity?
Say it one more time, how does Jesus deal with vanity?
That's right, gently.
Do you hear him?
Gently.
Jesus is not judging you, disappointed by you, angry with you, or looking down his nose at you.
He is gentle with your weaknesses.
Mine too.
And that is so important, particularly on this topic, because vanity is shame driven.
And even to confess vanity feels particularly shameful.
Somehow it seems more bearable to admit I occasionally lose it on my kids or harbor resentment toward my mom.
I hoard my finances or I fear the unknown.
I struggle with the pride of appearing put together and strong.
I tend to laze around when I'm unmotivated and alone.
Somehow in the anger, greed and sloth are all more bearable to admit than I can't stop.
I can't stop counting calories and working out.
I can't stop treatments and shopping.
I can't bear aging and growing less attractive.
I can't seem to be content with the way that I look.
I can't stop spending so much time and attention and mental energy on the way that I look.
That just feels more vulnerable, doesn't it?
We hate the way that sounds.
We can't seem to be gentle with ourselves, but there's good news.
He, he is able to deal gently with you and me.
How gentle is Jesus?
So gentle that he fought by surrender, by bodily surrender.
Jesus was mocked, humiliated, and beaten beyond human recognition.
Lie after lie after lie.
And what did he say to defend himself?
Not a word.
Isaiah 53, he was oppressed and afflicted yet he did not open his mouth.
He was led like a lamb to the slaughter and his sheep before its shears are silent so he did not open his mouth.
They stripped him naked.
They dangled his figure unflatteringly in front of a crowd so that they could hurl insult and accusation at him while he struggled through suffocated breath, while they all watched, while his naked, exposed body was subjected to shame and he didn't defend himself.
He prayed for their forgiveness, for your forgiveness, for mine.
That's how he breathed his last.
And then three days later he rose and it was a bodily resurrection.
Jesus went out of his way to show us that.
He's appearing to his disciples time after time and he's always eating with them.
I'm not a ghost.
I've defeated death and I've done it in a body digestive tract and all.
It's about supper time, isn't it?
What do we have them boys?
But first, when he rose, he appeared in a garden to a woman.
Now hang on.
What's wrong with the whole world and with me?
Why is it that I can't seem to love myself, accept myself, delight in myself, call myself good like God calls me good because a serpent told a lie to a woman in a garden.
And how does God make all that right?
He tells the truth to a woman in a garden.
He empathizes with us in every way, wins the gentlest kind of victory, and then he announces that victory in the gentlest way.
Mary, Mary.
He says to a woman whose body was demonized and prostituted, who was used, objectified, dehumanized, possessed by man after man after man, possessed by the serpent himself.
She was reclaimed by God when she heard him calling her name, Mary.
He is able to deal gently with you and me that gently, that personally, and that completely restoring among other things our relationship to our own bodies.
When it comes to vanity, how far is too far?
That's the question we ask in adulthood about ourselves and the very question we might have asked in adolescence about our relationship to someone else.
And I'd say this.
There's no clear line, but you know it when you see it, right?
There's staying in shape, and then there's no one is ripped in their 60s without spending a little too long in the gym.
There's healthy weight loss, and then there's something else.
There's makeup.
And I'm from the South, I can say this.
And then there's makeup.
There's tasteful cosmetic treatments and there's an amount of Botox and lip filler and plastic surgery that makes you unrecognizable as being a human.
It's so easy for us to see too far in somebody else, but can we see it in ourselves?
How do I know when I've taken vanity too far?
When it's become sin.
Well, I would suggest asking yourself this question.
Is it leading me to self-forgetfulness or to self-remembrance?
Are my habits or a particular habit or particular product or particular practice, is it frothing up self-forgetfulness or self-remembrance in me?
Because Jesus says that true, full life is found when I lose myself in love for others.
So is the way I relate to food, helping me sit and be present and attentive to my neighbor or am I preoccupied with my calorie count, dietary preferences or macronutrient balance?
Is the way I relate to clothing causing me to think about how I look, what I should wear, or is it helping me to see the other?
Is the amount of money I spend on cosmetic products something that I feel comfortable sharing with others?
Or would I prefer to keep it secret?
And if my instinct is secrecy, what does that show me?
Now I can keep on going, but here's the question.
What in relation to my own physical appearance leads me to self-remembrance more than self-forgetfulness?
And how might God be inviting me to curb that appetite in the direction of life and life to the full?
Which of course means in the direction
of others.
Let me tell you something that you know already, but all of American culture is conspiring to make you forget no matter what you do.
The hair you're styling will fall out.
The skin you're tightening will get wrinkly.
The toes you're painting are going to get knobbly.
The abs you're tightening are going to get flabby.
The muscles you're strengthening are going to grow weak and on and on and on.
Vanity is the sin of over prioritizing the most obviously expiring part of you.
Let me tell you something else.
Something the saints of old embrace that we in the modern church must remember.
Your physical body will either be the medium through which your soul grows up or it will be a deterrent stunting your soul's development.
Your body will age and wear out.
Every last one of us will spend however many days we've got left looking less and less youthful, less trim and fit, less desirable or elegant.
You and I will get wrinkly, flabby, fat, gray, spotty, hobbling and old.
Your physical capability will deteriorate until you struggle to walk, let alone run, to stand or even sit in certain positions for long periods of time, to be limited and limited more and more as your days near and
life in a human body is a journey from childhood to increasing capacity until you feel nearly limitless and then it's loss after loss after loss limit upon limit upon limit and do you know whose life that sounds like?
Christ, that sounds like Jesus who grew in wisdom and stature and favor with God and man to a point
and then limit upon limit upon limit until he couldn't carry his own cross without help, couldn't walk without staggering, couldn't stand up straight.
And eventually his body gave out in them all together only to come alive in a way that could not be taken.
And he invites you and me to live that untakeable life with him.
Here's how, die to yourself.
The way is embrace the downward path of loss after loss after loss limit upon limit upon limit.
Let your body as it ages be like the perfect pot where the seed of your soul is deposited so that it can grow and bloom and flourish.
That's the gift our mortal bodies can offer us over the years.
They can be a vessel through which our souls grow up.
How tragic then.
that American culture is obsessed with youth and seems hell-bent on denying aging.
We've got age-defying products, procedures, and prescriptions baked into everything.
Our celebrities look three or four decades younger than they are, and the more famous you are, the greater the age gap between you and the person on your arm.
We deny health and we worship youth and oh, what a false God youth is.
What an idol.
Our obsession with keeping our appearance young is unfortunately keeping our souls even younger.
And this I believe is Vanity's core issue.
Vanity celebrates the body by diminishing the soul.
Vanity is the sin of over prioritizing the most obviously expiring part of me, my physical appearance to the detriment of the most obviously eternal part of me, my soul.
1 Corinthians 6, do you not know that your bodies are temples of the Holy Spirit who is in you, whom you have received from God?
You are not your own.
You were bought with a price.
Therefore honor God with your bodies.
And one of the ways may be the first
primary way, we honor God with our bodies is calling good what he calls good.
Everything Tyler just named is true in Jesus.
Our bodies are called good.
We are redeemed and dwelt and as he beautifully said, gently restored.
And still just have to name this.
Many of us don't feel that, because theology doesn't just rewire our nervous system overnight.
Knowing you are loved does not automatically quiet the fear of being overlooked or unwanted or unattractive.
Truth, it can be fully believed and yet not fully embodied.
In that cap, even as I said last week, it's not rebellion, it's formation.
Our bodies learned long before our minds could articulate theology.
They learned what earned affirmation, what avoided rejection, and what kept us safe.
And so even after we confess, even after we say and embrace the things Tyler just said, God calls me good.
Our bodies still may brace.
Checking mirrors, managing impressions, rehearsing stories.
Cultural beauty, it trains us to stay vigilant because it is self-made and easily lost.
But beauty that is God-breathed is irrevocable.
It doesn't require maintenance, it doesn't have to be secured or defended, it can be received.
And receiving takes time.
So it might look like blessing your body instead of critiquing it.
Like naming the anxiety you're carrying without immediately trying to manage it.
or like letting the mirror be quiet long enough just for another voice to speak something.
It's important to remember that spiritual truth often lags behind emotional formation.
It doesn't mean you're doing something wrong.
But we are not resisting God, we are embracing love, and that means this has to be learned relationally.
And just as a reminder, this is free.
The work God is doing in us, especially as it pertains to this, at least in my experience, it is not rushed.
It's patient and it's kind and it is gentle.
The collectivism of the 12 steps, the most successful recovery program in history, bar none, is that dignity of every variety is restored by confession and a community of witnesses supporting your sobriety.
So let's break that down.
First, confession.
Confession, as we've been learning, isn't about punishment.
It is about exposure to love.
Vanity survives in secrecy, not because God doesn't know, but because we don't let people know.
So confession is the way we stop managing the image and we allow the truth to be seen.
And this kind of confession, it's rarely dramatic and I think that's important to say.
It should be ordinary and honest.
It's naming the habits that we've normalized, the thoughts that we've justified, or the compulsions that we've called discipline or stewardship.
And confession is powerful because it actually interrupts Vanity's primary fuel source, which is secrecy.
Because the lie is if they saw me or if they really knew I wouldn't be safe.
In confession, it tells a better story.
It says I can be known and not abandoned.
And that doesn't cure us, confession.
But it does, like Tyler said, restores dignity and it brings us back into the light where shame begins to lose its power.
Now next is witnesses.
Confession is made powerful by a community of witnesses and some of us are experiencing this week after week.
A witness is someone who knows your struggle without becoming your judge.
So someone who can see your patterns and at the same time still see your goodness.
Someone who helps you remember who you are when vanity tries to rewrite that story within you.
and we don't heal vanity through willpower, we've all tried it and let's be honest, it didn't work.
We heal it like we've been saying through presence, through people who can say, I see you and you are still good.
Now that leaves sobriety, meaning I have to identify and reject the compulsions that feed vanity's lies in me.
So what for me uniquely and individually feeds that cultural vanity story that identifies goodness by some lesser measure
than my maker.
Is it shopping?
Is it calorie counting?
Is it an attachment to exercise?
Sometimes sobriety in a place of vanity will feel like an addict counting the first 90 days.
It'll feel like a grind a long time usually before it feels like a way of being.
It will feel like loss before it feels like gain, which I know is encouraging.
It'll also feel like restraint more than it feels like freedom.
But here's the question we have to hold.
Who knows not only my diagnosis
my personal path to freedom.
That's hope.
That's life in the kingdom.
We need witnesses who not only know the worst in us, but even more the best in us and the path toward becoming him or her.
So who have you invited that deep as deep as your confession and as deep as your next step in sobriety?
This week you're gonna gather in your Bridgetown communities like you do week after week and we'll continue to practice confession.
But this week if I can, I wanna encourage you to practice not only the sin of vanity, but the step of sobriety you need to take next with Jesus.
This I believe helps catalyze the work of the spirit in us and what we're going after.
Thanks for joining the Bridgetown family as we engage in this teaching series.
To learn more about the life of our church and how you can get involved, visit Bridgetown.church.com.
If you're interested in contributing financially to Bridgetown Church and to our ministry, you can do that at Bridgetown.church.com.
Wherever you're joining us from, we hope this resource blesses you and encourages you to be with Jesus, become like Jesus, and do what Jesus did.